[improve][pip] PIP-321  Introduce `allowed-cluster` at the namespace level (#21648)
apache/pulsar: pip/pip-321.md

But in the current implementation, the replication-clusters and allowed-Clusters are all configured by specifying the replication clusters.
This will make the topic unable to have its replication policies.

To support geo-replication policies at the topic level and the message level, we must make the cluster configuration at the namespace level more clearly.
Introduce `allowed-clusters` at the namespace level and make `replication-clusters` only the default replication clusters for the topics under the namespace.

# Goals

## In Scope

The namespace will have a more detailed configuration for clusters. Users can use `replication-clusters` and `allowed-clusters` to configure the different behavioral logic of topics in the multiple clusters, rather than just using `replication-clusters` to control all behaviors.

## Out of Scope

This proposal can be used to solve the problem of topic-level and message level geo-replication can not work as expected. It is the initial motivation for this proposal, but this proposal does not involve modifications to geo-replication.

# High Level Design

> Add a new namespace policy `allowed_clusters`.

Reviewer: Could you explain the behavior for these scenarios:
- only `replicated clusters` is set
- only `allowed clusters` is set
- both `allowed clusters` and `replicated clusters` are set

Author: Good suggestion!

- Replication clusters configuration:
  - Set namespace `ns` replication clusters : cluster1 (local cluster)
  - Set replication clusters when send message1: cluster1, cluster2.

- Expected:
  - Message1 can replicate between cluster1 and cluster2.

- Actual:
  - Topic cannot be created at cluster2, and so the message1 can not be replicated to cluster2.

The root cause of these issues is that topics cannot access clusters that are not included in the replication-clusters of the namespace policy. 
The replication clusters and allowed clusters are different in the definition, and users don’t always want them to keep the same configuration. 
But in the current implementation, the replication-clusters and allowed-Clusters are all configured by specifying the replication clusters.
This will make the topic unable to have its replication policies.

To support geo-replication policies at the topic level and the message level, we must make the cluster configuration at the namespace level more clearly.
Introduce `allowed-clusters` at the namespace level and make `replication-clusters` only the default replication clusters for the topics under the namespace.

# Goals

## In Scope

> The namespace will have a more detailed configuration for clusters. Users can use `replication-clusters` and `allowed-clusters` to configure the different behavioral logic of topics in the multiple clusters, rather than just using `replication-clusters` to control all behaviors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The namespace will have a clearer configuration for clusters. Users can use `replication-clusters` and `allowed-clusters` to specify the clusters that the data of the namespace will replicate and the clusters that can load the topics under the namespace; it's similar to the tenant's `allowed-clusters.`
```

## Out of Scope

This proposal can be used to solve the problem of topic-level and message level geo-replication can not work as expected. It is the initial motivation for this proposal, but this proposal does not involve modifications to geo-replication.

# High Level Design

> A new namespace policy, `allowed_clusters`, should be added. The `allowed_clusters` policy will specify the clusters where topics under this namespace can be created or loaded. The `replication_cluster` indicates the clusters that are used to create a full mesh replication for all topics under this namespace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A new namespace policy option `allowed_clusters` will be added. The `allowed_clusters` policy will specify the clusters where topics under this namespace can be created or loaded. The `replication_cluster` indicates the clusters that are used to create a full mesh replication for all topics under this namespace.
```

> When a namespace has the policy with `allowed_clusters` and `replication_clusters`, the topics under this namespace will replicate data to all `replication_clusters` by default. Additionally, they can have their own flexible replication configuration, which should be a subset of the `allowed_clusters`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a namespace has the policy with `allowed_clusters` and `replication_clusters`, the topics under this namespace will replicate data to all `replication_clusters` by default. Additionally, the topic can have a flexible replication clusters configuration, which should be a subset of the `allowed_clusters` of the namespace.
```

If `allowed_clusters` is not set, `replication_cluster` will be used as the default value for `allowed_cluster`.

> If neither `allowed_clusters` nor `replication_cluster` are set, topics under this namespace will only be able to publish/subscribe at the local cluster.

Reviewer 2: Question: Can the `replication_cluster` be empty? Or we will have at least one local cluster.

Author: After the `allowed_cluster` is added. The `replication_cluster` could be empty. And the `allowed_cluster` should have at least one local cluster. 
The users do not need to specify it, Pulsar does it internally.

Author: Add this to the section too.

> Message-level replication is similar to topic-level replication. The replication clusters of a message should be the subset of the `allowed_cluster`, and are the `replication_clusters` configured at the topic level or namespace level by default.

Reviewer 2: Which error will users get if the specified clusters of the message are not a subset of the namespace?
And finally, we will also need to add allowed_clusters for a topic. It could not be a scope of this proposal, but it's better to write it down to the `Out of Scope` section.

# Detailed Design

## Public-facing Changes

### Public API

#### `setNamespaceAllowedClusters` Endpoint

This new endpoint allows setting the list of allowed clusters for a specific namespace.

**Method:**
```
POST
```

**Path:**
```

> /namespaces/{tenant}/{namespace}/allowedclusters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
/namespaces/{tenant}/{namespace}/allowedClusters
```

```

**Query Parameters:**

- `tenant`: The tenant within which the namespace resides.

> - `namespace`: The namespace for which you are setting the allowed clusters.

Reviewer 2: I think we can remove this one since they are presenting in the Path.

**HTTP Body Parameters:**

> - `clusterIds`: A list of cluster IDs.

Reviewer 2: Should it be `clusterNames`? I don't think we can concept of cluster ID.

Reviewer 2: Ok, I see we have used clusterIds before. It's fine for using clsuterIds here.

**Response Codes:**

- `400 Bad Request`: The list of allowed clusters should include all replication clusters.
- `403 Forbidden`: The requester does not have admin permissions.
- `404 Not Found`: The specified tenant, cluster, or namespace does not exist.
- `409 Conflict`: A peer-cluster cannot be part of an allowed-cluster.
- `412 Precondition Failed`: The namespace is not global or the provided cluster IDs are invalid.

**Explanation for 409 Conflict:** This follows the behavior of namespace replication clusters. As per PIP-8, a peer-cluster cannot be part of a replication-cluster. Similarly, for allowed-clusters, users could enable replication at the topic level, hence a peer-cluster cannot be part of allowed-clusters as well.

#### `getNamespaceAllowedClusters` Endpoint

This new endpoint allows retrieving the list of allowed clusters for a specific namespace.

**Method:**
```
GET
```

**Path:**
```

> /namespaces/{tenant}/{namespace}/allowedclusters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
/namespaces/{tenant}/{namespace}/allowedClusters
```

```

**Query Parameters:**

- `tenant`: The tenant within which the namespace resides.

> - `namespace`: The namespace for which you are retrieving the allowed clusters.

Reviewer 2: I think we can remove this one since they are presenting in the Path.

**Response Codes:**

- `403 Forbidden`: The requester does not have admin permissions.
- `404 Not Found`: The specified tenant, cluster, or namespace does not exist.
- `412 Precondition Failed`: The namespace is not global.

> 

Reviewer 2: It's better to add an exemplified response. I think it should be a JSON array of cluster names.

### Binary protocol

### Configuration

> ### CLI

Reviewer 2: Please also add the CLI changes to `bin/pulsar-admin namespaces create`

```
bin/pulsar-admin namespaces create
Main parameters are required ("tenant/namespace")

Creates a new namespace
Usage: create [options] tenant/namespace
  Options:
    --bundles, -b
      number of bundles to activate
      Default: 0
    --clusters, -c
      List of clusters this namespace will be assigned
```

To allow users to set allowed clusters when creating a namespace

Author: I am wondering whether we can mark the following Admin API as `@Deprecated`
```
void createNamespace(String namespace, Set<String> clusters) throws PulsarAdminException;
```
Because the Admin API with `Policies` is enough.
```
void createNamespace(String namespace, Policies policies) throws PulsarAdminException;
```

Author: It is used to set `clusterID` for v1 admin.
For v2 admin, creating namespaces with policy is enough.
```java
        if (ns.isV2()) {
            // For V2 API we pass full Policy class instance
            Policies policies = new Policies();
            policies.replication_clusters = clusters;
            return asyncPutRequest(path, Entity.entity(policies, MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON));
        } else {
            // For V1 API, we pass the BundlesData on creation
            return asyncPutRequest(path, Entity.entity("", MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON)).thenCompose(ignore -> {
                // For V1, we need to do it in 2 steps
                return setNamespaceReplicationClustersAsync(namespace, clusters);
            });
        }
```

Reviewer 2: Oh, I got your point.
It should be fine. `void createNamespace(String namespace, Set<String> clusters) throws PulsarAdminException;` is more intuitive for users to create namespaces with replication clusters. Policies usually means TTL, data retention ...

Author: The `replication_clusters ` also is a namespace policy. And after this proposal, do we need to add `createNamespace(String namespace, Set<String> allowedClusters)` and `createNamespace(String namespace, Set<String> clusters, Set<String> allowedClusters)`?  
I think this would add two unnecessary methods. Moreover, the parameter name `clusters` in the method parameters could confuse users.

Author: In my view, this method is merely used for maintaining compatibility with admin1, hence its method parameters have limitations. We should mark it as deprecated.
`void createNamespace(String namespace, Set<String> clusters) throws PulsarAdminException;`

# PIP-321: Split the responsibilities of namespace replication-clusters

# Background knowledge

Pulsar's geo-replication mechanism is typically used for disaster recovery, enabling the replication of persistently stored message data across multiple data centers. For instance, your application publishes data in one region, and you would like to process it for consumption in other regions. With Pulsar's geo-replication mechanism, messages can be produced and consumed in different geo-replication. See the introduction of geo-replication to get more information.[1]

> A client can set replication clusters for a namespace, and the pulsar broker internally manages replication to all the clusters.

Reviewer 2: It's better to also add 

A client can set allowed clusters for a tenant. 

And for this line

We can change to "A client can set replication clusters for a namespace, and the pulsar broker internally manages replication to all the clusters. And the replication clusters for a namespace must be a subgroup of the tenant's allowed clusters."

A namespace has multiple topics. Once a namespace is configured with replication clusters, all the topics under this namespace will enable replication in these clusters.
An allowed-cluster for a namespace is a cluster where the topics under the namespace can be loaded or created.
This concept is introduced with PIP–8. It does not formally propose this concept, but the implementation uses replication-clusters as allowed-clusters. See more information about this in PIP-8. [2]
Namespace Policy is a configuration in the namespace level, that is stored in the metadata store, e.g. zookeeper, and this configuration can not be accessed across multiple clusters with different metadata stores.

> Topic Policy refers to the configurations at the topic level that are stored in the bookkeeper ledger. Users can specify whether it is global. If it is global, the topic policy will be replicated to the multiple clusters. The clusters are configured by replication clusters now, and in the following, we called it Topic-Policy-Synchronize-Clusters.

Author: It is not the `topic's replication clusters`, it means the clusters where the topic policies of the topics under this namespace replicate to. That was some difference from `topic's replication clusters` or `replication clusters of topic`.

> Topic Policy refers to the configurations at the topic level that are stored in the bookkeeper ledger. Users can specify whether it is global. If it is global, the topic policy will be replicated to the multiple clusters. The clusters are configured by replication clusters now, and in the following, we called it Topic-Policy-Synchronize-Clusters.

Author: Of course, since we're separating the topic policy portion from this proposal, we don't need to worry about the name right now.

  - Topic policies can work as expected.

**Note:** This is an optional operation. You can choose not to configure the 'Topic-Policy-Synchronized-Clusters' and define different topic policies in the different clusters.

# Goals

## In Scope

The namespace has a more detailed configuration for clusters. Users can use `replication-clusters`, `allowed-clusters`, and `topic-policy-synchronized-clusters` to configure the different behavioral logic of topics in the multiple clusters, rather than just using `replication-clusters` to control all behaviors.

## Out of Scope

This proposal can be used to solve the problem of topic-level geo-replication can not work as expected. It is the initial motivation for this proposal, but this proposal does not involve modifications to geo-replication.

# High Level Design

Add two new namespace policies `allowed_clusters`, and `topic_policy_synchronized_clusters`.
Replace the function of  `replication_clusters` with `replication_clusters`, `allowed_clusters`, and `topic_policy_synchronized_clusters`.

# Detailed Design

## Public-facing Changes

### Public API
Add a new endpoint `setNamespaceAllowedClusters` to the REST API.
```
Type: POST

> Path: /namespaces/{tenant}/{namespace}/allowedcluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Path: /namespaces/{tenant}/{namespace}/allowedClusters
```

Query parameters: tenant, namespace
HTTP body parameters: List<String> clusterIds
Response code:
  * 400 Bad request, Allowed-clusters should contain all replication-clusters
  * 403 Forbidden, Don't have admin permission
  * 404 Not Found, Tenant or cluster or namespace doesn't exist.

>   * 409 Conflict, Peer-cluster can't be part of allowed-cluster.

Reviewer 2: What does this mean?

Reviewer 2: And it's also duplicated with the error code 412?

Author: There is an explanation below the line `code 412`. This follows the behavior of namespace replication clusters.
In my understanding, only one cluster in a `peer cluster group` can be a part of the `replication-clusters` at the same time.

  * 412 Precondition Failed, Namespace is not global or invalid cluster ids.
Explanation for 409 Conflict: This follows the behavior of namespace replication clusters. In the PIP-8, quoted in background knowledge, it introduce the concept of peer-cluster and peer-cluster can't be part of replication-cluster. For the allowed-clusters, users could enable replication at the topic level, so the peer-cluster can't be part of allowed-clusters too.
```

Add a new endpoint `getNamespaceAllowedClusters` to the REST API.
```
type: GET

> Path: /namespaces/{tenant}/{namespace}/allowedcluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Path: /namespaces/{tenant}/{namespace}/allowedClusters
```

Query parameters: tenant, namespace
Response code:
  * 403 Forbidden, Don't have admin permission
  * 404 Not Found, Tenant or cluster or namespace doesn't exist.
  * 412 Precondition Failed, Namespace is not global.
```

Add a new endpoint `setNamespaceTopicPolicySynchronizedClusters` to the REST API.
```
Type: POST
Path: /namespaces/{tenant}/{namespace}/topicpolicycluster
Query parameters: tenant, namespace
HTTP body parameters: List<String> clusterIds
Response code:
  * 400 Bad request, Allowed-clusters should contain all topic-policy-synchronized-clusters
  * 403 Forbidden, Don't have admin permission
  * 404 Not Found, Tenant or cluster or namespace doesn't exist.
  * 412 Precondition Failed, Namespace is not global or invalid cluster ids.
```

Add a new endpoint `getNamespaceTopicPolicySynchronizedClusters` to the REST API.
```
Type: GET
Path: /namespaces/{tenant}/{namespace}/topicpolicycluster
Query parameters: tenant, namespace
Response code:
  * 403 Forbidden, Don't have admin permission
  * 404 Not Found, Tenant or cluster or namespace doesn't exist.
  * 412 Precondition Failed, Namespace is not global.
```

### Binary protocol

### Configuration

> ### CLI

Reviewer 2: A new admin API is added, we should also add admin CLI.

### Metrics
None.

# Monitoring
None.
# Security Considerations

> If the broker enables authentication, then this configuration can only be set by the client who was authenticated.

Reviewer 2: Only the super user and tenant admin is allowed to access the newly added API?

Author: Yeah, if the user does not implement their `AuthorizationProvider`. This is the default behavior.

Reviewer 2: @liangyepianzhou Could you please update this part?

> # Backward & Forward Compatibility

Reviewer 2: Please define the compatibility and explain how to guarantee the compatibility

Reviewer 2: And what is the policy for the coexistence of the old and new configurations?

## Revert

> This can not be reverted if they enable geo-replication at the topic level. Otherwise, the replicator of these topics will be closed.

Reviewer 2: I think the revert here should be for the rollback (from the new configuration to the old configuration) or rollback to an old version.

## Upgrade
There are no additional operations that need to be performed. The replication-clusters will be the default value of allowed-clusters and topic-policy-synchronized-clusters.

# Alternatives

> Add a configuration `enableReplicationInTopicLevel` to make the topic able to be loaded in all clusters.

Reviewer 2: Could you please explain more about it? We can't understand it in one line.

Author: This is for the `Problem 2: Global Topic Policies Not Replicating as Expected`. Delete it from this proposal too. 
https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/21648#discussion_r1435921717

#### `getNamespaceAllowedClusters` Command

This new command allows you to retrieve the list of allowed clusters for a specific namespace.

**Usage:**

```
$ pulsar admin namespaces get-allowed-clusters <tenant>/<namespace>
```

**Response Codes:**

- `403 Forbidden`: You do not have admin permission.
- `404 Not Found`: The tenant, cluster, or namespace does not exist.
- `412 Precondition Failed`: The namespace is not global.

**Example Response:**

```
"cluster1"
"cluster2"
"cluster3"
```

#### `CreateNamespace` Command

Add a new option to this command to set allowed clusters when create a new namespace.

**Usage:**

```
$ pulsar admin namespaces create [options] tenant/namespace
```

**Options:**
   * --bundles, -b
      - number of bundles to activate. Default: 0
   * --clusters, -c 
     - List of replication clusters this namespace will be assigned. (Modified*)

>    * --allowed-clusters, -a (New*)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   --allowed-clusters, -a (New*)
```

#### `getNamespaceAllowedClusters` Command

This new command allows you to retrieve the list of allowed clusters for a specific namespace.

**Usage:**

```
$ pulsar admin namespaces get-allowed-clusters <tenant>/<namespace>
```

**Response Codes:**

- `403 Forbidden`: You do not have admin permission.
- `404 Not Found`: The tenant, cluster, or namespace does not exist.
- `412 Precondition Failed`: The namespace is not global.

**Example Response:**

```
"cluster1"
"cluster2"
"cluster3"
```

#### `CreateNamespace` Command

Add a new option to this command to set allowed clusters when create a new namespace.

**Usage:**

```
$ pulsar admin namespaces create [options] tenant/namespace
```

**Options:**
   * --bundles, -b
      - number of bundles to activate. Default: 0
   * --clusters, -c 
     - List of replication clusters this namespace will be assigned. (Modified*)

>    * --allowed-clusters, -a (New*)

Reviewer 2: Please mention that if `--allowed-clusters` is absent. The value of `--clusters` will be used as the allowed clusters.
And do you need to change the REST API to support setting allowed clusters when creating a namespace?

Author: >Please mention that if --allowed-clusters is absent. The value of --clusters will be used as the allowed clusters.
Good point. Thanks for the reminder.

Author: >And do you need to change the REST API to support setting allowed clusters when creating a namespace?

I replay it in https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/21648#discussion_r1461997483.
I think there are two approaches:
1. Mark `void createNamespace(String namespace, Set<String> clusters)` as deprecated.
2. Rename method param name of `void createNamespace(String namespace, Set<String> clusters)`. And add two method `createNamespace(String namespace, Set<String> allowedClusters)` and `createNamespace(String namespace, Set<String> replicationClusters, Set<String> allowedClusters)`.

Reviewer 2: I see. We have 

```
    @PUT
    @Path("/{tenant}/{namespace}")
    @ApiOperation(value = "Creates a new namespace with the specified policies")
    @ApiResponses(value = { @ApiResponse(code = 403, message = "Don't have admin permission"),
            @ApiResponse(code = 404, message = "Tenant or cluster doesn't exist"),
            @ApiResponse(code = 409, message = "Namespace already exists"),
            @ApiResponse(code = 412, message = "Namespace name is not valid") })
    public void createNamespace(@Suspended AsyncResponse response,
                                @PathParam("tenant") String tenant,
                                @PathParam("namespace") String namespace,
                                @ApiParam(value = "Policies for the namespace") Policies policies)
```

So we don't need to change the method signature.
